README 
E. coli timing analysis and the sigmoidal model
Ethan Ashby
Email: ecadeashby@gmail.com, Phone #: (925) 586-4191

Hello! This Github folder contains all the data and code needed to produce a
writeup (E.coli_final_analysis.pdf) which details the analysis of the timing of E. coli 
gene expression in response to cell starvation. Gene expression timing analysis is
conducted through sigmoidal models fit through the ImpulseDE2 package. The properties of
these sigmoidal models are first assessed through simulations, and then are applied to the
data at hand.

This README will give you a tour of this folder and will walk you through how to reproduce
these analyses.

A brief tour of the 'EthanAshby' folder:
The main file in this folder is the 'E.coli_final_analysis.Rmd' file, which includes the
text and code required to generate the technical report: 'E.coli_final_analysis.pdf'.
Included in the folder are several types of data files (detailed below). There are several
other folders included in this folder. The 'Extra' folder contains general miscellany (data,
code, etc.) generated during the summer of work. 'Images' contains screenshots that are linked
into the final technical report. 'GO Clusters' and 'Go Stricter Clusters' contain DEG lists
of intersections of 2+ and 3 DE tools respectively; these DEGs were run through a fuzzy
clustering pipeline to identify genes with similar expression profiles. The main goal of
this report was not a clustering analysis, so these data should be considered supplemental.
More detail on clustering can be obtained from Annie Cohen's folder.

Data files:
• meanExptoStationaryRpoSLevels.csv: this is the first data file in the Rmarkdown. This file
contains mean RpoS data and meanDensity for 3 trials of 3 WT and ∆RpoS strains each over 150
Min time course. These data are used to make the RpoS kinetics figures on pg 4.
• LB_Time_Course_GCA_000005845.2_ASM584v2_genomic_counts.tsv: this is the second data file
in the Rmarkdown. This file contains read count data for genomic features (unparsed ident-
ifier info in the first column) over different experimental conditions and times. The file
stationary_phase_data_sample_list_revised.xlsx provides a key for the acronyms and the 
experimental conditions and times. For example, JH01_A01 denotes the first replicate of 
the WT strain at time 0. In the Data Pre-Processing section, the genomic features were 
parsed and the read counts were filtered for CDS.
	***A major consideration here: we only focus on CDS sequences because we were particularly
	interested in the timing of expressions of genes. However, other genomic features such
	as IGRs, ncRNAs, etc that are highly differentially expressed could also be of interest.
	We suggest this as a potential route of further research.
•Sensitivity.xlsx: These data are used in the results section under the Exploratory and Wilcox
R chunk. This file (provided by Prof. Daniel Stoebel) contains all the E. coli gene names, 
bnums, direction of regulation, and the sensitivity to RpoS. This allows us to match DEGs 
identified by our pipeline to sensitive, insensitive, and linear genes.
•genesofinterest.txt: These data are used under the 'Overlay Trajectories and Relative mRNA plot'
R chunk. This is simply a list of genes, their bnums, and their sensitivities. These genes
were hand-picked by Prof. Stoebel as genes he was particularly interested in.
•uniprot-yourlist_M201907266746803381A1F0E0DB47453E0216320D5EB8C6I.tab: These data are used
in the Exploratory Analysis R chunk and is located within the 'Extra' folder. This file 
contains predicted functions, GO terms, metal associations, etc. This file was generated 
by submitting the DEG list to uniprot online GUI and selecting interesting features.
	***Mining UNIPROT Db and finding ways to integrate Rstudio with this Db more seamlessly
	could be a direction of further research.
	

